---
layout: take5-raw
course_ID: GYM-5014
permalink: /courses/take5/gym-5014
---

In this tutorial, you’ll learn how to use Adobe XD’s **Auto-Animate** feature in order to create a high fidelity interactive prototype as seen here. Now you can [follow along by downloading the lesson file at this URL][1]{: rel="noopener"}, or by clicking on the link in the **Resources** section for this video. Once you open up the lesson file, you’ll see a single art board that I’ve prepared for you. The way **Auto-Animate** works is by comparing two artboards, seeing if they have layers with the same name and then animating any properties that have changed between the two.

Now, again, I’ve prepared this art board for you. Go ahead and *click* on any image, and you’ll see that I hid a header and a footer right outside the main artboard, and these are the first two objects that are going to be animated. To see the next object that will be animated, *click* on the doughnut image and then in the **Layers** list, and *click* on the group **Cropping Guides**. In the **Inspector**, look for the opacity slider, and note it’s set to **0%**. If you slide it to **100%**, you’ll see these guides appear, but go ahead and bring it back to **0** (zero) for now.

The last objects to be animated are all of the other thumbnails except the donut. So if you *click* on any one of them, you’ll see they’re all grouped and that’s going to make them easier to control. Now that you know what’s going to be animated, let’s go ahead and do it. *Place* your cursor over at the artboard title, *press* your <kbd>Option</kbd> key and *click* and *drag* the artboard to the right. Now *click* anywhere inside the artboard, and *click* and *drag* the header down and the footer up. Next, *click* on those hidden crop guides I showed you earlier and bring the opacity to **100%**.

*Click* on any gallery image and bring the opacity down to **0** (zero) to fade them all out. Next in the **Layers** list, *click* on the **Cropping Guides** group, <kbd>Shift</kbd> + *click* on the Doughnut image layer to *select* them both, then *press* your <kbd>Shift</kbd> key and *grab* the lower left corner of the selection and *drag* down and to the left until you can get equal spacing on both sides. *Now let’s animate.* *Click* on the **Prototype** tab, then *click* on the doughnut image in that first artboard. *Grab* that *blue* handle on the right side and *drag* it to the second artboard.

Over in the interaction panel, if the **Trigger** is set to **Tap**, just leave it as it is. Otherwise, *click* on the **Menu** and *choose* Tap. Next, *click* on the **Action** menu and *choose* **Auto-Animate**, which is what you’re all here for. Let’s go ahead and look at **Easing**, which is a way to control the speed of your animation. For example, *choose* **Ease Out** and this means the animation will start quickly at the beginning and then slow down toward the end. If you want to [learn more about easing][2]{: target="_blank" rel="noopener"}, be sure to check out the **Resources** section for this video.

Finally, for **Duration** go ahead and *type* **0.3** seconds and *press* <kbd>Enter</kbd> or <kbd>Return</kbd>. Now *press* **Play** to preview the animation. You can *click* on the doughnut, and you’ll see the magic of **Auto-Animate**. Every object that changed between these two artboards has automatically been animated, which is pretty cool. But go ahead and *close* this preview, and let’s give the user a way to get back to the initial screen. *Double-click* on the **Cancel** button here, and *drag* the *blue* handle back to the first artboard. Notice all the settings you created in the last step are the same, which is great. *Press* the **Desktop Preview** again, *click* the **Cancel** button, and notice how **Auto-Animate** takes care of everything once again.

And you can even go back and forth between these two screens. When you get bored with that, go ahead and close your preview. The last thing you’ll do is create an auto-animation that lets the user physically *drag* these crop handles, especially if they’re using a mobile device, to preview the prototype. To do this, <kbd>Option</kbd> + *click* the second artboard to make a *copy*, go ahead and *drag* that over, then *click* on the cropping guides and create a square crop around the doughnut like so.

You can do it by hand, or if you want to make sure it’s a true square. You can type in values for width and height here in the **Inspector**. I used **184** and **184**. Now on the previous artboard, *click* on the **Cropping Guides**, double check they’re actually selected in the **Layers** list, then go to **Prototype Mode**, *click* and *drag* the *blue* handle from the guides to the third artboard. Now you’re going to change the trigger. So *click* on that **Trigger** menu, *choose* **Drag**, and for **Easing** *choose* **Snap**.

*Preview* again, and now you’ll be able to *drag* that handle, and if you let go at any point the animation snaps into place, which adds a little bit of realism to the whole thing. And again, I’m doing this on a **Desktop Preview**, but Adobe XD has a **Device Preview** feature that will let you interact with this on a phone or tablet, which is very cool. *Thanks for watching.* Be sure to [check out our other Take 5 tutorials][3], as well as [the rest of our full course catalog at Gymnasium][4].

[1]: https://gymnasium.github.io/take5/gym-5014.zip
[2]: https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/design-and-ux/animations/the-basics-of-easing
[3]: https://thegymnasium.com/courses/take5
[4]: https://thegymnasium.com/courses
