---
layout: take5-raw
course_ID: GYM-5011
permalink: /static/take5/gym-5011
---

In this tutorial, you’re going to learn how to use **Smart Layout** in Sketch. In order to follow along, you can [download the lesson file at this URL][1]{: rel="noopener"}. Although, there’s also a link to the file in the **Resources** section for this video.

**Smart Layout** allows you to control the appearance and behavior of any symbol in Sketch by either applying **Horizontal** or **Vertical Layout** to it. You’re going to take a look at **Horizontal Layout** first, and each pair of these buttons has a specific layout that has already been applied. Now, you’re going to do some typing to force each one to adapt to the content, and when you’re done, I’ll show you how it works.

Go ahead and *click* on the first button, and in the **Override** field, *type* `Cd`. Then, *click* the second button, and *type* `Streaming Audio`, and you can see here you’ve got some overflowing text. These two buttons are based on the **No Layout** model which is the default mode for symbol instances.

Now, you’re going to explore how **Smart Layout** changes this entire game. Go ahead and *click* on this button and *type* `Cd` in the **Override** field, and the button width shrinks. *Click* on the second button, *type* `Streaming Audio`, and the button width expands *which is very convenient*.

Now, equally important is how the layout has changed. In both cases, the left edge remain fixed, and here on this button, the right edge contracted, and on this one, it expanded from left to right. *Type* the word `Cd` again in this next button, and the layout shrinks but this time from the center and with equal amounts of space on both sides.

*Type* `Streaming Audio`, and again equal amounts of space are added to both sides. This is the behavior of **Horizontal Centered Layout**. Add the same content for these last two buttons, and again the buttons adapt. But this time, the right edge of the button stays fixed, and in the case of the long text, the button layout expands from the right to the left.

*Click* on the **Symbols** page, and then *click* on each of these master symbols in turn. Sure enough, this first one uses **No Layout**. The second uses **Left to Right**. The third is **Horizontal Centered**, and the last is **Right to Left**.

Now, while we’re here, let’s *click* on this *green* master symbol and change the layout from **None** to **Horizontal Centered**, just to see what happens. Back on our main page, the layout has not changed. Well, the reason is because of the way Sketch interprets overrides on a symbol instance.

*Hover* over this double arrow icon which reads **Shrink instance to fit content**. *Click* it, and indeed, the button does shrink. *Click* on the second button, and do the same thing, and you can see here that the button expands. So the best practice here is that if you ever change the layout type of a symbol, be sure to *click* the **Fit Content** button to adjust your instance.

Now, you can also define **Smart Layout** whenever you create a new symbol. So here’s a quick example. *press* `R` on your keyboard. *Click* and *drag* a rectangle. *press* `T` on your keyboard, and *type* the word `label`, and *drag* it to the center.

*Click* and *drag* over the whole thing, and *press* **Create Symbol**. This dropdown menu is set to **No Layout** by default, but if you *click* on that, you’ll see some familiar options. *choose* **Horizontal**, *click* **OK**, then *type* `Streaming Audio` in your **Override** field, *and there you go, working as expected*.

Let’s explore a **Vertical Layout** by clicking on this page, and when you add text into this description field, it overflows by default *which is no good*. So undo that, and then *double-click* anywhere inside here to get into the symbol. Now, change the layout from **No Layout** to **Vertical**, and specifically, the first option, **Top to Bottom**.

Why? Because you want the top of your container to stay fixed and the layout to *push everything downwards*, like so, *which it does*, and I’m happy. *This is cool*, but just *double-click* on the card again to look at the symbol. *I want to give you a little warning.*

This component is a bit more complicated than our buttons. I did a few things here that we don’t have time to explore. For example, this group of the **Album Artist** and **Description** are pinned to the top, left, and right edges and have a fixed size as well. The same is true of a few of the other objects, such as the image.

It’s important to understand the fundamentals of Sketch. These are critical to mastering **Smart Layout** which is no magic bullet, but it does allow you to do cool things, like resize your components, both horizontally and vertically. Just remember the *best practice* I mentioned earlier, and if your instances aren’t acting the way you would expect, look for the **Fit Content** icon, and *click* it to adjust your layout.

That’s it for now. *Thanks for watching.* If you like this Take 5 clip, be sure to [check out the rest of the series][2] and [our entire course catalog at Gymnasium][3].

[1]: https://gymnasium.github.io/take5/gym-5011.zip
[2]: https://thegymnasium.com/take5
[3]: https://thegymnasium.com/courses
