---
layout: take5-raw
course_ID: GYM-5015
permalink: /static/take5/gym-5015
---

In this tutorial, you’ll learn how to create advanced animations in Figma using the **Smart Animate** feature. Specifically, you’re going to prototype this effect where a user can *click* and *drag* to create transparency for an image. You can [follow along by downloading the lesson file at this URL][1]{: rel="noopener"} or by clicking on the link in the **Resources** section for this video.

Once you open up the lesson file, you’ll see a single frame that I’ve set up for you as well as a donut image that will come in very handy a little bit later. And the way that **Smart Animate** works is by comparing two frames, looking for matching layers, and then animating the differences between those frames. The easiest way to see this is to *`0ption`-click* frame one and *drag* it to the right to duplicate it. And now you’ll begin to make some changes.

First on frame one, *click* on the header, and then *press* your `Shift` key and *nudge* it upwards until it’s out of sight above the frame. Now do the same thing for the footer, making sure it’s completely outside the boundaries of the frame. Then switch over to frame two, *click* on any image. And because they’re all grouped, if you go to the **Layer** menu and *type* `0%` for **Pass Through**, they will all disappear. But let’s just go ahead and make a few more changes on frame two. So *click* on the donut image here, *press* and *hold* the `Shift` key, and then *drag* the anchor points until that image fits the entire width of the screen. Go ahead and reposition it if you need to.

Last, look at the layer named **Alpha instructions** over in the **Layers** list and then *click* it. I created this object beforehand and gave it an **Opacity** of **0** (zero). So change the **Pass Through** to **100%** to bring this back up. Cool. So these two screens now look completely different. But because all the objects were originally located in the first frame, Figma is going to animate everything that changes. However, you need a trigger to make that happen.

So *double-click* on the donut image here in frame one *click* on **Prototype Mode**. For interaction, *choose* **On Click** and then **Navigate To**. And then *choose* the **Alpha_editing 2** frame. Finally, in the Animation section, *choose* **Smart Animate**, which is where all the magic happens. And let’s go ahead and check it out by pressing **Present**. *Click* on the donut. And sure enough, *you’ve got yourself a sweet animation*. And you barely had to break a sweat.

But let’s go back and do another one and get a little more interactive. *`Option`-click* this frame to create a new one. *Press* `R` to *select* the **Rectangle Tool** and then *drag* to make a small square. So this is a fake color picker. And you want this to appear when the user taps on the background. Let’s *click* the **Fill Color**, *choose* the **Eyedropper**, and get an accurate colored like this.

While we’re here, let’s *click* on the **+** (plus) button to add a **Stroke**. And that’s going to help a little bit with the contrast. So that’s actually all you’re doing on the screen. *`Option`-click* this frame to create a new duplicate, and then *click* and *drag* that fake color picker to the top right hand side.

Now, remember that donut image I pointed out at the beginning? I did something tricky here. I made this donut image with a checkerboard pattern in Photoshop, and then I imported it into Figma. So now *drag* this image over the original donut. Take a few seconds to *align* it like so. You can test that it’s perfectly aligned by turning this visibility off and on. That looks pretty good. When you’re satisfied, *delete* the original donut layer, but also reposition this new image and make sure that the color picker at this rectangle is above it like so.

*Now, let’s go ahead and animate.* Go back to the **Alpha_editing 2** frame. *Double-click* on the donut image. In **Prototype Mode**, set the **Interaction** to **On Click**. And in *Navigate*, set it to *Alpha_editing 3*. All this step does is make the color picker appear. *That’s it*.

So in the next frame, *click* on the color picker. And for the interaction, *choose* **On Drag**, which is *very important*. Then *click* **Navigate To** and then **Alpha_editing 4**. In the animation section, *click* on the menu in *choose* **Smart Animate**. To preview this, go back to the **Alpha_editing 2** frame and *click* on it because that’s the screen where you want to start previewing.

Go ahead and *press* the **Preview** button. *Click* anywhere in the bottom left, and that little color picker appears. *Cool.* You can go ahead and *drag* that back and forth for a while. Keep in mind that the second you let go, you’re going to be stuck on the screen because you haven’t created an exit for the user. But you know how to do that, right?

That’s it. *Thanks for watching.* If you like this Take 5 clip, be sure to [check out the rest of the series][2], as well as [the entire course catalog at Gymnasium][3].

[1]: https://gymnasium.github.io/take5/gym-5015.zip
[2]: https://thegymnasium.com/take5
[3]: https://thegymnasium.com/courses
