---
layout: take5-raw
course_ID: GYM-5001
permalink: /static/take5/gym-5001
---

In today’s Take 5, you’re going to make a scrolling background image effect [as seen here](https://codepen.io/josborn/pen/joNmyO){: target="_blank" rel="noopener"}. This effect is similar to the parallax effect that can be found on many places across the web, such as this one.

Your version will be using the CSS `background-size: cover` and `background-attachment: fixed` features, as well as a sprinkling of viewport height, or `vh` units. [Here’s the project on CodePen](https://codepen.io/josborn/pen/BebXer){: target=”_blank” rel=”noopener”} you’ll be working with, and [here’s the URL](https://codepen.io/josborn/pen/BebXer){: target="_blank" rel="noopener"}, which you can also find linked within the Resources section for this video.

In your HTML, you’ll see three `div`s, each has the class of `bg` and an in`div`idual ID name — `bg-1`, `bg-2`, and `bg-3`. And there’s also a fourth `div` with the class of `content`.

In the CSS, the `div` style has a thin black border to help you visualize the `div`s, and the height is set to 200 pixels. The `bg` class has this `background-repeat` value set to **no-repeat**, which means the images only show up once. And then last, notice that each ID points to a background image.

Now, I set the `div` height to 200 pixels on purpose. I wanted to show you that it’s not obvious that the heights of all background images are actually 550 pixels.

Increase the height of the `div`s to 300 pixels to reveal more image.

Increase it to 600 pixels, and you’ll see the entire image, as well as an extra 50 pixels of space.

You’ll be revisiting that height in a second, but first, center the images in the bg style by typing: `background-position: center center;`.

Next, add the `background-size` property and give it a value of **cover**. The `background-size` property with the value of **cover** scales the image as large as possible without stretching the width or height.

If you’re using this technique, here’s some things to be careful of. If you take a small postage stamp image like this one and scale it up to full page, it’s going to look like garbage.

On the flip side, if you use a high resolution image, it’s going to look great at full size but your user pays a performance penalty by being forced to download unnecessarily large images. So please take the time to find the right balance between image quality and image size for your projects.

Back in your project, you can see how the images now cover the entire span of the `div` to the degree possible. Go ahead and add this additional height property and value after the original one — `height: 90vh;`.

The 600 pixel value is being left for fallback reasons. A modern browser will use the `vh` unit because it’s last in order. An older browser that doesn’t support `vh` units will ignore the `vh` unit and use the 600 pixel value. You may not be used to `vh` units, so save your project and go into the full-view mode while I explain.

One `vh` unit is equal to 1% of the viewports initial containing block. This means that `90vh` forces the height of your `div`s to 90% of the viewport or browser window.

You can actually see this in the full page view. If you scroll all the way to the top, you can see the bottom of the first `div` ends here at 90% height. This remaining 10% here is the top of your second `div`. Scrolling down, you can see all your `div`s will be the exact same height.

So now, change your view back to the editor. And you’ll add the real star of the show. Go ahead and type: `background-attachment: fixed;`. The fixed value forces the background images to stay where they are. If you save your document and go into the full-view mode, you can see this happening.

So it’s kind of disorienting but also kind of cool. What’s effectively happening is the `div`s are moving but the background images don’t. Keep in mind these are just decorative background images. There’s no content inside your `div`s.

We don’t have time to explore what else you could do with that, but as a quick example, copy the very last `div` and paste it between `div`s 2 and 3. Then go ahead and save and preview in full view.

Now one major catch to be aware of, there’s a big problem with most mobile browsers and this effect. On caniuse.com, you can see that the combination of `background-attachment: fixed` and `background-size: cover` simply doesn’t work on iOS.

There are some workarounds to address this, but we don’t have time to cover them in this video. If you need to `div`e into those fixes, however, check our Resources section for help. That’s it for now. Thanks for watching. If you like this video and want to learn more CSS skills, be sure to [check out our other Take 5 videos](https://thegymnasium.com/take5), as well as [the rest of the course catalog at Gymnasium](https://thegymnasium.com/courses).

