---
layout: take5-raw
course_ID: GYM-5013
permalink: /static/take5/gym-5013
---

In this tutorial, you’ll learn how to use in InVision Studio’s **Timeline** feature to give you more precise control over your animations. Now you can [follow along by downloading the lesson file at this URL][1]{: rel="noopener"} or by clicking on the link in the **Resources** section for this video.

Once you open up the lesson file, you’ll see two artboards that already have an animation created for you. *Press* the **Play** button, and you’ll see a practical but fairly boring effect as these thumbnails automatically fade in. So it would be great if we could give this animation a little more character. Go ahead and *close* that window, and we’re going to give it a shot.

First you need to know how this existing animation works. The only difference between these two screens is the **Opacity** of these thumbnail images. In the **Before** screen, *click* on the **Gallery 1** folder. And then *`Shift`-click* on the **Gallery 8** folder to *select* all the images.

Notice here in the **Inspector** that the **Opacity** is set to **0** (zero). Now, if you looked at these same layers in the **After** artboard, you would see these images have an **Opacity** of **100%**. *Click* on the **Before** artboard. And in the **Interaction** section, the **Trigger** is set to **Timer**. And the **Timeout** is **1 second** (1s), which is how long the screen waits before running the animation.

And just what is that animation? Well, the transition type is set to motion and with a **Duration** of **0.3 seconds**. In InVision Studio, a motion transition compares two screens and then animates any layers that have changed between them, such as those images we just looked at.

Now go ahead and *click* on the **Edit Timeline** button. And you’re going to add a little more sophistication to your effect. First *choose* the following settings to help you preview this animation in slow motion: *Click* the **Loop Animation** button. And then *click* the **Change Speed** menu. And then *choose* **0.2x**, and *press* **Play**.

Now what this does is loop your animation at a speed that’s **80% slower** than the original. Just to be clear, *this is **not** changing the true duration of the fade*. It’s just a slow motion preview. And it’s super useful for looking at the timing of the elements on your page and then making adjustments. So go ahead and *press* **Pause**.

So the first method of customizing your animation is easing, which is how you can control the acceleration or deceleration of your **Opacity** effect. InVision Studio’s default setting is called **Ease Both**. And you can see that by clicking this button here at the top of the screen. **Ease Both** means all of your animations will have a slow start, a fast middle, and then a slow end. And by the way, if you want to [learn more about easing][2]{: target="_blank" rel="noopener"}, be sure to check out the **Resources** section for links to some good articles.

Next you can override easing on an individual layer basis if you’d like. For example, *click* on the menu for **Gallery 1**. And then change it to **Ease Out**. Then do the same thing for **Gallery 2**.

If you *press* **Play** now, you’ll see those two images *fade up* to **100%** much more quickly than the other images. Might seem like a subtle effect. But it does make the page appear to be loading more quickly since those two images are in the top row.

Now, you can also decide when you want individual layers to start animating as well as adjust the **Duration** of any given animation right here in the **Timeline**. So *`Shift`-click* the **Gallery 3** and **Gallery 4** layers. And then *drag* them to the right to have them start at **0.1 seconds**.

Then *`Shift`-click* the **Gallery 5** and **Gallery 6** layers, and *drag* them to start at **0.2**. And finally, *`Shift`-click* the **Gallery 7** and **Gallery 8** layers and *drag* them to start at **0.3**. *Press* **Play** now, and what you’ll see is that by staggering that start point, you get this nice, cascading effect for your images instead of having them all appear at once.

Now you can also shorten the **Duration** of any given layer, which you might want to do to give things a snappier feel. To do that, *click* on **Gallery 3** and then *`Shift`-click* on **Gallery 8**. Then *grab* the end of any layer and *drag* it to thes left to about **0.2**.

Let’s go ahead and test this back on our main page by pressing **Done**, and then *press* **Play** to see the final effect. *Pretty cool.* If you want to see it again, just *click* this menu and *select* the **Before** artboard to trigger.

Also just for kicks, here’s the original loading screen. And then here’s the revised one — so **Original**, **Revised**, **Original**, **Revised**. As you can see, the extra attention to detail in the revised version looks a lot more polished and natural.

*And guess what?* This is just the tip of the iceberg. All you did here was animate **Opacity** for your images. But you could also animate any number of other properties, including position, scale, color, and much more. And that’s pretty cool, especially for high fidelity, interactive prototypes.

So that’s it. *Thanks for watching.* And be sure to [check out the rest of the Take 5 series][3] as well as [our full course catalog at Gymnasium][4].

[1]: https://gymnasium.github.io/take5/gym-5013.zip
[2]: https://developers.google.com/web/fundamentals/design-and-ux/animations/the-basics-of-easing
[3]: https://thegymnasium.com/take5
[4]: https://thegymnasium.com/courses
